---
title: 'Common Organisational Barriers and the Role of External Consultancy in Overcoming Them - An Executive Summary'
date: 2024-03-15
permalink: /posts/2024/03/exec-1/
tags:
  - organisational practices
  - security culture
  - external stakeholders
---

<title>OT security culture: Common organisational barriers and the effects of external consultancy</title>

<p>This executive summary presents part of our research findings on security culture development in companies that use operational technology (OT), summarizing this publication (https://www.usenix.org/conference/soups2023/presentation/evripidou). The research has been ongoing since May 2022, and currently includes 72 participants with an OT cybersecurity related role. We have incorporated practitioners working in companies using OT, as well as various external actors. These include CISOS, OT managers, consultants, service providers, and regulators from the energy, transport, water, manufacturing, and oil and gas sectors. 
Cultures are the amalgamation of a group’s knowledge, beliefs, perceptions, attitudes, and most crucially behaviours. They often studied at the organisational level and can be value-driven, as is the case with safety culture. We have identified three common organisational barriers to improving security perceptions and implementing security measures centred on the interactions between the engineering and operations functions, and those of IT and security. Overcoming these barriers provides companies with a strong foundation towards developing a more holistic OT security culture. The role of external actors and the implications of their involvement on culture development are also highlighted. These barriers are: <ol>
a.  <li>Governance and Accountability </li>
b.  <li>OT Cybersecurity Expertise </li>
c.  <li>Communication and Collaboration </li></ol></p>
The first and most structural barrier is the accountability and governance of OT cybersecurity. OT cybersecurity necessitates the cooperation of functions with often different reporting and management lines and Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) leading to ineffective ownership of cybersecurity in OT environments. Before and during our research, many companies have been through a process of defining and improving their OT cybersecurity governance, often through restructuring. While there is no golden rule on how this process should be designed, as evident by the many different practices we have observed, the clear assignment of responsibilities for OT cybersecurity should be a priority. 
The second identified barrier is the lack of OT cybersecurity expertise, partly caused by the lack of established academic and professional development pathways for cybersecurity concerning engineering and automation, as well as the immaturity of the field. Accordingly, efforts should made to introduce cybersecurity as part of apprenticeship training, and instilled as a positive organisational value towards supporting a company’s core aims. Additionally, key OT engineers could be upskilled or seconded to achieve a closer working relationship with cybersecurity personnel. 
Another factor that diminishes culture development, is the move of professionals from OT companies to external cybersecurity roles, leading to the loss of undocumented knowledge, tacit expertise, and existing relationships. Similarly, given the demographics in operational environments, and that it is typical for operational personnel to spend a significant part of their career in a company, the risk of key personnel retiring is a concern. As such, companies need to be conscious of how to best retain existing tacit knowledge, through mentoring, shadowing, and other efforts. 
Finally, the most commonly identified barrier is the lack of communication and collaboration between the IT and security functions, and those of operations and engineering. Attempts to secure OT environments with IS-tailored measures (e.g., patching, passwords etc.) have often led to diminished trust between these functions. Communication efforts are also hampered by confusion over terminology (e.g., TTL - time-to-live or threat-to-life, or hazard is a well-defined term used in safety regulations whereas it is more vaguely used in cybersecurity). Overall, OT personnel’s prioritization of their systems’ availability and safety combined with their “engineering” mindset makes them more averse to change compared with professionals having an IT background. As such, companies need to identify facilitators who can work across teams, establish working groups with personnel from different backgrounds, and think how best to bridge these two mindsets. In some cases, these facilitators could come from a technology innovation background (e.g., cloud, IoT, data analytics) whose work spans both IT and OT boundaries.
The lack of internal OT cybersecurity expertise has often led companies to seek assistance from external specialists, like consultants and product and service providers. We have identified ample evidence of these actors’ contributions to overcoming the identified barriers. Namely, these actors help in the design of policies and the delegation of responsibilities, tackling governance issues. They also raise awareness and share relevant knowledge, improving cybersecurity expertise. More crucially, they often act as facilitators and translators between different functions, breaking down barriers of communication and internal politics. However, while these actors can influence organisational practices, there are limits to the extent of organisational change they can achieve. Developing a culture is a continuous and lengthy process, requiring top-level buy-in and involvement. Additionally, targeting OT personnel could be more effectively done in-house, by tailoring the security message to fit their values and practices. 
While these barriers have been addressed in most companies, practitioners aiming to strengthen their security culture should think about which other groups will benefit from increased collaboration and knowledge exchange. One such example would be to facilitate conversations at the intersection of functional safety and cybersecurity, or between the security team and operational personnel. Overall, based on our analysis, efforts should be made to: 
a)  Identify resignation and retirement risks in an attempt to document their knowledge.
b)  Establish cybersecurity’s role in achieving the company’s goals (e.g., provision of services) at the early employment stages.
c)  Promote closer working relationships between key engineers and cybersecurity teams and, if applicable, encourage workforce development on cybersecurity through educational or certification pathways.
d)  Reflect on the perceived mind-set differences between “operational/engineering” (OT) and “IT” mind-sets, by identifying suitable mediators and translators. 
e)  External actors should ensure that proposed security advice and solutions can be effectively adopted and maintained by their customers, by providing relevant training and assistance.
Overall,   we believe that targeting the three identified barriers would be a significant step towards developing an organisational security culture. Out of the three, we believe that identifying facilitators who can bring together professionals from various backgrounds, is the most crucial step on this journey. Having this strong baseline will then enable companies to influence their operational personnel more effectively. However, given the variety of roles in operational environments (operators, technicians, administrators, engineers etc.), we believe that further research into how cybersecurity affects their day-to-day jobs would be beneficial when it comes to developing an OT security culture. 




======

You can have many headings
======

Aren't headings cool?
------