---
title: 'Drawing from Safety Culture to Improve OT Security Culture - An Executive Summary'
date: 2024-06-03
permalink: /posts/2024/03/exec-2/
tags:
  - safety culture
  - security culture
  - organisational practices
---

<title>Drawing from Safety Culture to Improve OT Security Culture - An Executive Summary</title>


<p align="justify">This executive summary presents part of our research findings on security culture development in companies that use operational technology (OT), summarizing this  <a href="https://rpsonline.com.sg/proceedings/esrel2023/html/P297.html">publication</a>.This research currently includes 72 participants with OT cybersecurity related roles, such as CISOS, OT managers, consultants, security service providers, and regulators a variety of sectors including energy, transport, water and oil and gas. To support this work, we have conducted a review of the academic literature on safety and security cultures. Additionally, we have analysed our participants’ reflections on safety culture; more specifically, the influence of safety culture in organisational cybersecurity practices, and the challenges a cybersecurity culture faces compared to safety.  Our findings show that: <ol>
<li> Cybersecurity and safety cultures share almost entirely overlapping enabling factors (e.g., top management support) and have been influenced by similar models. </li>
<li> Practitioners in OT often have a more nuanced understanding of culture development, in many cases having experienced the transformation in safety, compared to academic research in security culture where the advancements in safety culture literature have been overlooked. </li>
<li>However, differences between the two cultures exist which have implications on cybersecurity culture development: <ol type="a"> 
<li>  The two cultures are at different maturity levels, with cybersecurity culture being much younger than safety culture, and subsequently less developed.
</li> <li> The nature of safety makes safety risks and their impact at the occupational and process levels more easily understood compared to cybersecurity risks.</li>
<li>A cybersecurity culture cannot be as neatly divided into occupational and process safety cultures as most individuals’ actions have an effect on the security of the process, complicating efforts to change individual behaviours.</li></ol> </li></ol></p>
<p align="justify">Organisational cultures  are the combination of employee values, beliefs, behaviours, and organizational structures , which in turn, shape organisational practices. Value-based cultures are rooted in the effective management of resources and efforts directed at shaping a subset of organisational practices. In the case of OT companies, safety and more recently, cybersecurity, are two such values where efforts to develop a value-based culture have been made. Historically, regulation and accidents were the two primary drivers for the development of safety cultures. Similarly, the Network and Information Systems (NIS) regulations, and to a lesser extent, OT specific cyber-incidents (e.g., Ukrainian Power attacks, Colonial Pipeline) have had a similar effect in OT  cybersecurity. </p>
<p align="justify">A number of models have been utilised for research in both cultures, such as Schein’s three levels (underlying assumptions, espoused values, observable artifacts), and Reason’s five sub-cultures (informed, reporting, learning, flexible, and just). Many   participants in this study cited examples of some of these concepts (e.g. reporting, no-blame/just) as part of their vision for a security culture, demonstrating the diffusion of these concepts from safety culture to security. We highlight this positive finding, as many practitioners were more familiar with culture development compared to academic research in security culture which has generally focused on a smaller subset of concepts around awareness and training. </p>
<p align="justify">The elements considered essential to develop both cultures also greatly overlap. Typically, they include a) top management’s involvement and support, b) management systems such as policies and procedures, workforce development, awareness campaigns, and c) other communication mechanisms leading to d) a shared understanding of risks and responsibilities. Many  participants highlighted how the buy-in and support from their boards and senior management were beneficial in their efforts to improve cybersecurity practices (e.g., cybersecurity becoming part of annual statements, risk appetite, and CEO calls). </p>
<p align="justify">Comparing the two, cybersecurity culture  was judged as immature compared to safety partly  due to cybersecurity’s shorter history. Other challenges include the fact that safety risks are more easily understood, both at the individual and organisational level due to their physical nature and tangible impact . In practice, safety culture encompasses two sub-cultures: occupational and process safety cultures. Unsafe behaviours can have an immediate effect on an employee’s wellbeing, whereas an employee’s cybersecurity behaviours will directly impact the process or enterprise rather than the individual, and thus have been less readily understood. Developing a process cybersecurity culture is therefore critical, where cybersecurity is introduced as early  in the design and implementation stages of a system. </p>
<p align="justify">Both cybersecurity and safety cultures are often seen as the “third-wave” of change, as a more encompassing concept involving people, following technical innovations and the introduction of processes and management mechanisms. However, this perception can overshadow the importance of both processes and technology in shaping a mature culture  . This is often visible in current security culture research which focuses on the role of management and various educational, training and awareness efforts. Nevertheless, for a culture to be successful the introduction of management structures and processes should take place, which can in turn be embedded, audited, and reviewed. </p>
<p align="justify">With respect to various awareness efforts, certain practices from safety culture can be translated to cybersecurity, such as the highlighting of socially non-permissible actions (e.g., not holding the stairway handrail in safety, the use of removable media and other devices in industrial environments for cybersecurity). As discussed, advantage could also be taken of the links between cybersecurity and processes to enhance the awareness of OT personnel. However, efforts to raise awareness, or retain a level of alertness about cybersecurity are hampered by the difficulty in identifying and reporting incidents, and more broadly the absence of any significant and catastrophic attacks in OT compared to significant safety incidents (e.g., Piper Alpha, Clapham Junction). </p>

<p align="justify">Overall, this research has highlighted the similarities between these two cultures in terms of enabling factors and approaches. In practice, cybersecurity culture is still less mature that safety. A number of factors, including the difficulty in differentiating between occupational and process cybersecurity, and the differences in risk perception, are also holding cybersecurity back. On a positive note, many practitioners who have lived through the changes in safety culture, are well equipped to draw lessons and examples that can be applied to security. 
Based on the findings of this research, we recommend the following:  <ol>
<li>  Invest in process cybersecurity culture with dedicated OT security personnel, and emphasize the potential effects of cybersecurity in operational processes when it comes to changing perceptions and awareness in OT.
</li><li> As safety and security get more intertwined especially on the process side, identify practitioners who can bridge these two teams, in a similar fashion to how the OT/IT divide was bridged.
</li><li>  Practitioners have highlighted the importance of senior management buy-in and support in cybersecurity efforts. However, it is not always clear whether such efforts effectively reach operational levels. As such, efforts to identify whether cybersecurity is supported and championed in front-line operational environments should be made. </li></ol> </p>